Added lab for flipping formats and cleanup topics. (#138)
aws-samples/cfn101-workshop: workshop/content/basics/templates/flipping-formats-and-cleanup/_index.md

---
title: 'Flipping formats and cleanup'
date: 2021-12-22T16:27:38Z
weight: 1000
---

### Overview
You can write AWS CloudFormation [templates](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSCloudFormation/latest/UserGuide/template-formats.html) in JSON or YAML formats: you choose either one or the other depending on your preference. For more information, see [AWS CloudFormation template formats](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSCloudFormation/latest/UserGuide/template-formats.html).

> In this module, you will look into an example of switching from a JSON-formatted template into a YAML format: you will use the [cfn-flip](https://github.com/awslabs/aws-cfn-template-flip) tool as an option to easily perform this task. You will also use `cfn-flip` to perform opinionated cleanup actions for an example, input template.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this module, you will look into an example of switching from a JSON-formatted template into a YAML format: you will use the [cfn-flip](https://github.com/awslabs/aws-cfn-template-flip) tool as an option to easily perform this task. You will also use `cfn-flip` to perform opinionated cleanup actions for an example template.
```

Reviewer: imo this reads a little more naturally

### Topics Covered
By the end of this lab, you will be able to use `cfn-flip` as an option to:

* Flip from JSON to YAML formats, and vice versa.
* Perform opinionated cleanup actions on an example template.

### Start Lab

> [Install](https://github.com/awslabs/aws-cfn-template-flip#installation) `cfn-flip` with `pip`:

Reviewer: Could be worth offering `brew install cfn-flip` as an alternative for Mac OS users who don't have python

Author: Thank you, @stilvoid - I will add it now.

Author: Done.

```shell
$ pip install cfn-flip
```

Next, verify you can run `cfn-flip` by running the following command:

```shell
$ cfn-flip --version
```

> 

Reviewer: Missing header here? These don't feel like `Install` steps

Author: No header missing - just following up as part of the install step.  I am adding clarifying text to the line before the command.  Thank you!

Author: Added clarifying text.

Let's now convert an example JSON-formatted template into YAML. Follow steps below to locate the template you will use, in this lab, for the task:
1. Change directory to the `code/workspace/flipping-formats-and-cleanup` directory.
2. Open the `example_parameter.json` CloudFormation template in your favorite text editor.
3. Read the content of the `example_parameter.json` file: this template describes an `AWS::SSM::Parameter` resource type for an [AWS Systems Manager Parameter Store](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/systems-manager/latest/userguide/systems-manager-parameter-store.html) parameter. With this example template, you:

>       - specify the value you wish to store for your Parameter Store parameter by using the [Ref](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSCloudFormation/latest/UserGuide/intrinsic-function-reference-ref.html) intrinsic function to reference the input `ParameterValue` template parameter. When you create a stack off of this template, you pass in your desired value as an input to `ParameterValue`;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      - specify the value you wish to store for your Parameter Store parameter by using the [Ref](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSCloudFormation/latest/UserGuide/intrinsic-function-reference-ref.html) intrinsic function to reference the input `ParameterValue` template parameter. When you create a stack from this template, you pass in your desired value as an input to `ParameterValue`;
```

>       - use `Ref` to reference the name you wish to assign to your Parameter Store parameter, that you specify in the `ParameterName` template parameter when you create a stack off of the template;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      - use `Ref` to reference the name you wish to assign to your Parameter Store parameter, that you specify in the `ParameterName` template parameter when you create a stack from the template;
```

>       - add a description for your Parameter Store parameter: in this example, you choose to use the [Fn::Join](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSCloudFormation/latest/UserGuide/intrinsic-function-reference-join.html) intrinsic function to concatenate string fragments, whose one of them contains the reference to the name of your Parameter Store parameter. In the example template, string fragments are separated by a space, as indicated in the `" "` _delimiter_, that is the first [parameter](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSCloudFormation/latest/UserGuide/intrinsic-function-reference-join.html#intrinsic-function-reference-join-parameters) you are passing here to the `Fn::Join` function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      - add a description for your Parameter Store parameter: in this example, you choose to use the [Fn::Join](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSCloudFormation/latest/UserGuide/intrinsic-function-reference-join.html) intrinsic function to concatenate string fragments, one of which contains the reference to the name of your Parameter Store parameter. In the example template, string fragments are separated by a space, as indicated in the `" "` _delimiter_, that is the first [parameter](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSCloudFormation/latest/UserGuide/intrinsic-function-reference-join.html#intrinsic-function-reference-join-parameters) you are passing here to the `Fn::Join` function.
```

{{% /notice %}}

Example template excerpts, that focus on points you just learned, are summarized next:

```json
[...]
    "Parameters": {
        "ParameterName": {
            "Description": "Name you wish to specify for your SSM Parameter.",
[...]
        },
        "ParameterValue": {
            "Description": "Value you wish to specify for your SSM Parameter.",
[...]
        }
    },
    "Resources": {
        "MyParameter": {
            "Type": "AWS::SSM::Parameter",
            "Properties": {
                "Name": {
                    "Ref": "ParameterName"
                },
                "Type": "String",
                "Value": {
                    "Ref": "ParameterValue"
                },
                "Description": {
                    "Fn::Join": [
                        " ",
                        [
                            "My",
                            {
                                "Ref": "ParameterName"
                            },
                            "example parameter"
                        ]
[...]
```

> Next, use `cfn-flip` to convert your template from the JSON format into YAML. Choose to run the following command from the directory where the `example_parameter.json` JSON-formatted template is located:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, use `cfn-flip` to convert your template from the JSON format into YAML. Run the following command from the directory where the `example_parameter.json` JSON-formatted template is located:
```

```shell
$ cfn-flip example_parameter.json example_parameter.yaml
```

{{% notice note %}}

> The `cfn-flip` tool automatically detects the format of your input template (in your case, JSON), and will convert it into the opposite output format accordingly (in this example, into YAML). To explicitly tell `cfn-flip` to convert into YAML or into JSON (and to have `cfn-flip` assume the input template uses the opposite format), choose the `-y` (or `--yaml`) option or the `-j` (or `--json`) option, respectively. For more information, choose to run ` cfn-flip --help` from the command line.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `cfn-flip` tool automatically detects the format of your input template (in your case, JSON), and will convert it into the opposite output format accordingly (in this example, into YAML). To explicitly tell `cfn-flip` to convert into YAML or into JSON (and to have `cfn-flip` assume the input template uses the opposite format), choose the `-y` (or `--yaml`) option or the `-j` (or `--json`) option, respectively. For more information, run ` cfn-flip --help` from the command line.
```

{{% /notice %}}

As a result, you should now have a new template, in the same directory, called `example_parameter.yaml`. Open the template in your favorite text editor: can you recognize elements that you converted into YAML with `cfn-flip`?

> Excerpts from the `example_parameter.yaml` template are shown next. You will note that the `Fn::Join` intrinsic function, that you saw in the JSON-formatted template, is now represented with its YAML short form, `!Join`; this is because `cfn-flip` [makes use of short form function declarations](https://github.com/awslabs/aws-cfn-template-flip#about) where possible:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Excerpts from the `example_parameter.yaml` template are shown next. You will note that the `Fn::Join` intrinsic function, which you saw in the JSON-formatted template, is now represented in its YAML short form, `!Join`; this is because `cfn-flip` [makes use of short form function declarations](https://github.com/awslabs/aws-cfn-template-flip#about) where possible:
```

```yaml
[...]
Parameters:
  ParameterName:
    Description: Name you wish to specify for your SSM Parameter.
[...]
  ParameterValue:
    Description: Value you wish to specify for your SSM Parameter.
[...]
Resources:
  MyParameter:
    Type: AWS::SSM::Parameter
    Properties:
      Name: !Ref 'ParameterName'
      Type: String
      Value: !Ref 'ParameterValue'
      Description: !Join
        - ' '
        - - My
          - !Ref 'ParameterName'
          - example parameter
```

> With `cfn-flip` you can also convert from YAML to JSON. For more information, and to discover other `cfn-flip` features, choose to run the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With `cfn-flip` you can also convert from YAML to JSON. For more information, and to discover other `cfn-flip` features, run the following command:
```

```shell
$ cfn-flip --help
```

{{% notice note %}}

> When you write your templates in YAML format, you can choose to specify YAML comments in your template content by using the `#` character at the beginning of a line. When you use `cfn-flip` to convert from YAML into JSON, your YAML comments are not added to your output template in JSON format.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you write your templates in YAML format, you can choose to specify YAML comments in your template content by using the `#` character at the beginning of a line. When you use `cfn-flip` to convert from YAML into JSON, your YAML comments are not added to your output template in JSON format. This is because JSON does not support comments (see <https://json.org> for more information).
```

Your task is to perform opinionated cleanup actions on the `example_parameter.yaml` template, and store the cleaned up template output in a new file in your workspace, called `example_parameter_updated.yaml`. Please note that you want to maintain the same YAML format for the output template, instead of converting it to JSON.

Start with finding which options you need to pass to `cfn-flip` first, then run `cfn-flip` against the input template, and verify the output template uses the short form for the `Fn::Sub` intrinsic function instead of the short form for the `Fn::Join` intrinsic function.

{{%expand "Need a hint?" %}}
Print the `cfn-flip` usage with: `cfn-flip --help` to find which two options you want to use for the task. Which are these two options?
{{% /expand %}}

{{%expand "Want to see the solution?" %}}

> Choose to use the two following options: `-n -c` (or `--no-flip --clean`) for `cfn-flip` to maintain the same format (in this case, YAML), and to perform opinionated cleanup actions. Choose to run the following command, in your workspace:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use the two following options: `-n -c` (or `--no-flip --clean`) for `cfn-flip` to maintain the same format (in this case, YAML), and to perform opinionated cleanup actions. Run the following command in your workspace:
```
